2005 Netrokona bombing was a bomb attack on 8 December 2005 at a meeting of Bangladesh Udichi Shilpigoshthi in Netrokona, Bangladesh that resulted in the deaths of eight people. It was carried out by the Islamist Jamaat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh who have in the past bombed courts demanding Sharia law.

==Attacks==
On 8 December 2005, Bangladesh Udichi Shilpigoshthi, a secular cultural organisation, had organised a cultural program.  A suicide bomber of Jamaat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh attacked the event killing eight people including two police officers. Two suicide bombers were also killed in the bombing. The joint convenor of Udichi in Netrokona, Khaja Haider Hossain, was killed in the attack. Two of the victims died in Netrokona Sadar Hospital and three others died in Mymensingh Medical College Hospital.

The Bangladesh Nationalist Party led government tried to blame the attack on a Hindu man, Yadav Das, who was killed in the explosion.  This was criticised by both the local people and the opposition Bangladesh Awami League. State Minister for Home Affairs Lutfozzaman Babar first called Yadav an Hindu extremist but on 15 December 2005 rescinded his statement and said Yadav was innocent.

==Trial==
On 17 February 2008 a Dhaka Court sentenced to death, Asaduzzaman Chowdhury alias Panir, Salahuddin alias Saleheen, and Yunus Ali.  Of them Yunus was tried in absentia as he was absconding.  Asaduzzaman Chowdhury alias Panir appealed and in 2014 his appeal was rejected by Bangladesh High Court.  On 23 March 2016 Bangladesh Supreme Court upheld the death penalty.

==Reactions==
The district unit of the Bangladesh Awami League, then opposition party, called a hartal (strike) on 10 December following the attack.  The bombing was condemned by Workers' Party President Rashed Khan Menon who said justice would not be possible as long as the Bangladesh Nationalist Party was in power.  It was also condemned by Hasanul Haq Inu, the Communist Party of Bangladesh, Bikalpa Dhara Bangladesh, Bangladesh Chhatra Federation, and Bangladesh Jatiyatabadi Chhatra Dal.  The Supreme Court Bar Association visited the surviving victims on 18 December 2005 and called for the government to provide compensation.

==References==